list
****


Description
===========

Lists the policies in the specified compartment (either the tenancy or
another of your compartments). See Where to Get the Tenancy's OCID and
User's OCID.

To determine which policies apply to a particular group or
compartment, you must view the individual statements inside all your
policies. There isn't a way to automatically obtain that information
via the API.


Usage
=====

   oci iam policy list [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--compartment-id, -c [text]
---------------------------

The OCID of the compartment (remember that the tenancy is simply the
root compartment). [required]


--page [text]
-------------

The value of the *opc-next-page* response header from the previous
"List" call.


--limit [integer]
-----------------

The maximum number of items to return in a paginated "List" call.


--all
-----

Fetches all pages of results. If you provide this option, then you
cannot provide the --limit option.


--page-size [integer]
---------------------

When fetching results, the number of results to fetch per call. Only
valid when used with --all or --limit, and ignored otherwise.


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
