delete
******


Description
===========

Deletes the specified volume. The volume cannot have an active
connection to an instance. To disconnect the volume from a connected
instance, see Disconnecting From a Volume. **Warning:** All data on
the volume will be permanently lost when the volume is deleted.


Usage
=====

   oci bv volume delete [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--volume-id [text]
------------------

The OCID of the volume. [required]


--if-match [text]
-----------------

For optimistic concurrency control. In the PUT or DELETE call for a
resource, set the *if-match* parameter to the value of the etag from a
previous GET or POST response for that resource.  The resource will be
updated or deleted only if the etag you provide matches the resource's
current etag value.


--force
-------

Perform deletion without prompting for confirmation.


--wait-for-state [PROVISIONING|RESTORING|AVAILABLE|TERMINATING|TERMINATED|FAULTY]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation creates, modifies or deletes a resource that has a
defined lifecycle state. Specify this option to perform the action and
then wait until the resource reaches a given lifecycle state. If
timeout is reached, a return code of 2 is returned. For any other
error, a return code of 1 is returned.


--max-wait-seconds [integer]
----------------------------

The maximum time to wait for the resource to reach the lifecycle state
defined by --wait-for-state. Defaults to 1200 seconds.


--wait-interval-seconds [integer]
---------------------------------

Check every --wait-interval-seconds to see whether the resource to see
if it has reached the lifecycle state defined by --wait-for-state.
Defaults to 30 seconds.


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
