change-compartment
******************


Description
===========

Moves an instance pool into a different compartment within the same
tenancy. For information about moving resources between compartments,
see Moving Resources to a Different Compartment.

When you move an instance pool to a different compartment, associated
resources such as the instances in the pool, boot volumes, VNICs, and
autoscaling configurations are not moved.


Usage
=====

   oci compute-management instance-pool change-compartment [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--instance-pool-id [text]
-------------------------

The OCID of the instance pool. [required]


--compartment-id, -c [text]
---------------------------

The OCID of the compartment to move the instance pool to. [required]


--if-match [text]
-----------------

For optimistic concurrency control. In the PUT or DELETE call for a
resource, set the *if-match* parameter to the value of the etag from a
previous GET or POST response for that resource.  The resource will be
updated or deleted only if the etag you provide matches the resource's
current etag value.


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
