get
***


Description
===========

Gets the specified compartment's information.

This operation does not return a list of all the resources inside the
compartment. There is no single API operation that does that.
Compartments can contain multiple types of resources (instances, block
storage volumes, etc.). To find out what's in a compartment, you must
call the "List" operation for each resource type and specify the
compartment's OCID as a query parameter in the request. For example,
call the ListInstances operation in the Cloud Compute Service or the
ListVolumes operation in Cloud Block Storage.


Usage
=====

   oci iam compartment get [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--compartment-id, -c [text]
---------------------------

The OCID of the compartment. [required]


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
