post
****


Description
===========

Publishes raw metric data points to the Monitoring service. For more
information about publishing metrics, see Publishing Custom Metrics.

The endpoints for this operation differ from other Monitoring
operations. Replace the string *telemetry* with *telemetry-ingestion*
in the endpoint, as in the following example:

https://telemetry-ingestion.eu-frankfurt-1.oraclecloud.com


Usage
=====

   oci monitoring metric-data post [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--metric-data [complex type]
----------------------------

A metric object containing raw metric data points to be posted to the
Monitoring service. This is a complex type whose value must be valid
JSON. The value can be provided as a string on the command line or
passed in as a file using the file://path/to/file syntax.

The --generate-param-json-input option can be used to generate an
example of the JSON which must be provided. We recommend storing this
example in a file, modifying it as needed and then passing it back in
via the file:// syntax.

   [required]


--batch-atomicity [ATOMIC|NON_ATOMIC]
-------------------------------------

Batch atomicity behavior. Requires either partial or full pass of
input validation for metric objects in PostMetricData requests. The
default value of NON_ATOMIC requires a partial pass: at least one
metric object in the request must pass input validation, and any
objects that failed validation are identified in the returned summary,
along with their error messages. A value of ATOMIC requires a full
pass: all metric objects in the request must pass input validation.

Example: *NON_ATOMIC*


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
