update
******


Description
===========

Updates the list of access rules in the Web Application Firewall
configuration for a specified WAAS policy. Access rules allow explicit
actions to be defined and executed for requests that meet various
conditions. A rule action can be set to allow, detect, or block
requests. The detect setting allows the request to pass through the
Web Application Firewall and is tagged with a *DETECT* flag in the Web
Application Firewall's log. This operation can create, delete, update,
and/or reorder access rules depending on the structure of the request
body. Updating an existing access rule can be accomplished by changing
the properties of the access rule object with a non-empty *key*
property in the list. Reordering of access rules can be accomplished
by changing the order of the access rules in the list when updating.
Creating an access rule can be accomplished by adding a new access
rule object to the list without a *key* property. A *key* will be
generated for the new access rule upon update. Deleting an access rule
can be accomplished by removing the existing access rule object from
the list. Any existing access rule with a *key* that is not present in
the list of access rules sent in the request will be deleted.


Usage
=====

   oci waas access-rule update [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--waas-policy-id [text]
-----------------------

The OCID of the WAAS policy. [required]


--access-rules [complex type]
-----------------------------

This is a complex type whose value must be valid JSON. The value can
be provided as a string on the command line or passed in as a file
using the file://path/to/file syntax.

The --generate-param-json-input option can be used to generate an
example of the JSON which must be provided. We recommend storing this
example in a file, modifying it as needed and then passing it back in
via the file:// syntax.

   [required]


--if-match [text]
-----------------

For optimistic concurrency control. In the *PUT* or *DELETE* call for
a resource, set the *if-match* parameter to the value of the etag from
a previous *GET* or *POST* response for that resource. The resource
will be updated or deleted only if the etag provided matches the
resource's current etag value.


--wait-for-state [ACCEPTED|IN_PROGRESS|FAILED|SUCCEEDED|CANCELING|CANCELED]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

This operation asynchronously creates, modifies or deletes a resource
and uses a work request to track the progress of the operation.
Specify this option to perform the action and then wait until the work
request reaches a certain state. If timeout is reached, a return code
of 2 is returned. For any other error, a return code of 1 is returned.


--max-wait-seconds [integer]
----------------------------

The maximum time to wait for the work request to reach the state
defined by --wait-for-state. Defaults to 1200 seconds.


--wait-interval-seconds [integer]
---------------------------------

Check every --wait-interval-seconds to see whether the work request to
see if it has reached the state defined by --wait-for-state. Defaults
to 30 seconds.


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
