free-text-search
****************


Description
===========

Queries any and all compartments in the tenancy to find resources that
match the specified criteria. Results include resources that you have
permission to view and can span different resource types. You can also
sort results based on a specified resource attribute.


Usage
=====

   oci search resource free-text-search [OPTIONS]


Options
=======


--text [text]
-------------

The text to search for. [required]


--matching-context-type [NONE|HIGHLIGHTS]
-----------------------------------------

The type of matching context returned in the response. If you specify
*HIGHLIGHTS*, then the service will highlight fragments in its
response. (See ResourceSummary.searchContext and SearchContext for
more information.) The default setting is *NONE*.


--limit [integer]
-----------------

The maximum number of items to return. The value must be between 1 and
1000.


--page [text]
-------------

The page at which to start retrieving results.


--from-json [text]
------------------

Provide input to this command as a JSON document from a file using the
file://path-to/file syntax.

The --generate-full-command-json-input option can be used to generate
a sample json file to be used with this command option. The key names
are pre-populated and match the command option names (converted to
camelCase format, e.g. compartment-id --> compartmentId), while the
values of the keys need to be populated by the user before using the
sample file as an input to this command. For any command option that
accepts multiple values, the value of the key can be a JSON array.

Options can still be provided on the command line. If an option exists
in both the JSON document and the command line then the command line
specified value will be used.

For examples on usage of this option, please see our "using CLI with
advanced JSON options" link: https://docs.cloud.oracle.com/iaas/Conte
nt/API/SDKDocs/cliusing.htm#AdvancedJSONOptions


-?, -h, --help
--------------

For detailed help on any of these individual commands, enter <command>
--help.
